---
title: "Infrastructure Engineering in the 21st Century"
date: 2015-12-15T18:57:41-06:00
slug: "infrastructure-engineering-in-the-21st-century"
categories: ["Distributed Systems", "Software Engineering"]
tags: ["abstraction", "distributed systems", "fault tolerance", "infrastructure engineering", "not-invented-here syndrome", "reliability engineering", "software engineering"]
---

Infrastructure engineering is an inherently treacherous problem space because it’s core to so many things. Systems today are increasingly distributed and increasingly complex but are built on unreliable components and will continue to be. This includes unreliable networks and faulty hardware. The 21st century engineer understands **failure is routine**.

Naturally, application developers would rather not have to think about low-level failure modes so they can focus on solving the problem at hand. Infrastructure engineers are then tasked with competing goals: provide enough abstraction to make application development tractable and provide enough reliability to make subsystems useful. The second goal often comes with an additional proviso in that there must be sufficient reliability without sacrificing performance to the point of no longer being useful. Anyone who has worked on enterprise messaging systems can tell you that these goals are often contradictory. The result is a wall of sand intended to keep the developer’s feet dry from the incoming tide. The 21st century engineer understands that **in order to play in the sand, we all need to be comfortable getting our feet a little wet from time to time.**

With the deluge of technology becoming available today, it’s tempting to introduce it all into your stack. Likewise, engineers are never happy. Left unchecked, we will hyper optimize and iterate into oblivion. It’s a problem I call _“innovating to a fault.”_ Relying on “it’s done when it’s done” is a great way to ship vaporware. Have tangible objectives, make them high-level, and realize things change and evolve over time. Frame the concrete things you’re doing today within the context of those objectives. There’s a difference between Agile micromanagey roadmaps and having a clear vision. Determine when to innovate and when not to. [Not Invented Here syndrome](https://bravenewgeek.com/not-invented-here/) can be a deadly disease. Take inventory of what’s being built, make sure it ties back to your objectives, and avoid falling prey to tech pop culture. Optimize for the right problems. The 21st century engineer understands that **you are not defined by your tools, you are defined by what you produce at the end of the day.**

The prevalence of microservice architecture has made production tooling and instrumentation more important than ever. Teams should take ownership of their systems. If you’re not willing to stand by your work, don’t ship it. However, just because something falls outside of your system’s boundaries doesn’t mean it’s not your problem. If you rely on it, _own it_. Don’t be afraid to roll up your sleeves and dive into someone else’s code. The 21st century engineer understands that they live and die by the code they have in production, and **if they don’t run anything in production, they aren’t really an engineer at all.**

The way in which we design systems today is different from the way we designed them in the 20th century and the way we will design them in the future. There is a vast amount of research that has gone into computer science and related fields dating back to the invention of the modern computer. Research from the 50’s, 60’s, all the way up to today shows that system design always is an evolving process. Compiling this body of knowledge together provides an invaluable foundation from which we can build. The 21st century engineer understands that **without a deeper understanding of that foundation or with a blind trust, we are only as good as our sand castle.**

It’s our responsibility as software engineers, as system designers, as programmers to use this knowledge. Our job is not to build systems or write code, our job is to solve problems, of which code is often a byproduct. No one cares about the code you write, they care about the problems you solve. More specifically, they care about the _business_ problems you solve. The 21st century engineer understands that **if we’re not thinking about our solutions end to end, we’re not really doing our job.**

### Engage to Assuage

Abstraction is important. It’s how humans deal with complexity. You shouldn’t have to understand every little intricate detail behind how your system works. It would take _years_ to do so. But abstraction comes at a cost. You agree to the abstraction’s interface, you place your trust in it, and then you remove it from your mind. That is, until it fails—and abstractions of sufficient complexity _will_ fail. After all, we are building atop unreliable components. Also, a layer of abstraction doesn’t provide any guarantees in higher levels above it, which often results in some false assumptions.

We cannot understand how everything will work, but we should have enough understanding of how it _will not_ work. More plainly, we should understand the cost of the abstractions we use so that we can pay for them with confidence. This doesn’t mean giving up on abstraction but _engaging_ with the complexity that it manages.

I’ve written before about how [distributed systems are a UX problem](https://bravenewgeek.com/distributed-systems-are-a-ux-problem/). They’re also a design problem. And a development problem. And an ops problem. And a business problem. The point is they are _everyone’s_ problem because they are complex, and things that are sufficiently complex eventually _leak_. There is no airtight abstraction in this world. Without understanding limitations and trade-offs, without using the knowledge and research that has come before us, without thinking _end to end_, we set ourselves up for failure. If we’re going to call ourselves engineers, let’s start acting like it. Nothing is a black box to the 21st century engineer.
