---
title: "Not Invented Here"
date: 2014-12-06T14:17:52-06:00
slug: "not-invented-here"
categories: ["Algorithms", "Databases", "Distributed Systems", "Software Engineering"]
tags: ["algorithms", "databases", "distributed systems", "elasticsearch", "not-invented-here syndrome", "redis", "software engineering", "solr", "zookeeper"]
---

Engineers love engineering things. The reason is self-evident (and maybe self-fulfilling—why else would you be an engineer?). We like to think we’re pretty good at solving problems. Unfortunately, this mindset can, on occasion, yield undesirable consequences which might not be immediately apparent but all the while damaging.

Developers are all in tune with the idea of “don’t reinvent the wheel,” but it seems to be eschewed sometimes, deliberately or otherwise. People don’t generally write their own merge sort, so why would they write their own consensus protocol? Anecdotally speaking, [they do](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/redis-db/Oazt2k7Lzz4/MPhvXVizCAYJ).

Not-Invented-Here Syndrome is a very real thing. In many cases, consciously or not, it’s a cultural problem. In others, it’s an engineering one. Camille Fournier’s [blog post](http://whilefalse.blogspot.com/2013/05/zookeeper-and-distributed-operating.html) on ZooKeeper helps to illustrate this point and provide some context. In it, she describes why some distributed systems choose to rely on external services, such as ZooKeeper, for distributed coordination, while others build in their own coordination logic.

We draw a parallel between distributed systems and traditional RDBMSs, which typically implement their own file system and other low-level facilities. Why? Because it’s their _competitive advantage_. SQL databases sell because they offer finely tuned performance, and in order to do that, they need to control these things that the OS otherwise provides. Distributed databases like Riak sell because they _own_ the coordination logic, which helps promote their competitive advantage. This follows what Joel Spolsky [says about NIH Syndrome](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000007.html) in that “if it’s a core business function—do it yourself, no matter what.”

> If you’re developing a computer game where the plot is your competitive advantage, it’s OK to use a third party 3D library. But if cool 3D effects are going to be your distinguishing feature, you had better roll your own.

This makes a lot of sense. My sorting algorithm is unlikely to provide me with a competitive edge, but something else might, even if it’s not particularly novel.

So in some situations, homegrown is justifiable, but that’s [not always the case](http://aphyr.com/posts/283-call-me-maybe-redis). Redis’ competitive advantage is its predictably low latencies and data structures. Does it make sense for it to implement its own clustering and leader election protocols? _Maybe_, but this is where NIH can bite you. If what you’re doing is important and there’s precedent, _lean on existing research and solutions_. Most would argue write safety is important, and there is certainly precedent for leader election. Why not leverage that work? Things like Raft, Paxos, and Zab provide solutions which are proven using formal methods and are peer reviewed. That doesn’t mean new solutions can’t be developed, but they generally require model checking and further scrutiny to ensure correctness. Otherwise, you’ll inevitably [run into problems](https://www.stellar.org/blog/safety_liveness_and_fault_tolerance_consensus_choice/). Implementing our own solutions can provide valuable insight, but leave them at home if they’re not rigorously approached. Rolling your own and calling it “good enough” is dishonest to your users if it’s not properly communicated.

Elasticsearch is another interesting case to look at. You might say Elasticsearch’s competitive advantage is its full-text search engine, but it’s not. Like Solr, it’s built on Lucene. Elasticsearch was designed from the ground-up to be distributed. This is what gives it a leg up over Solr and other similar search servers where horizontal scaling and fault tolerance were essentially tacked on. In a way, this resembles what happened with Redis, where failover and clustering were introduced as an afterthought. However, unlike Redis, which chose to implement its own [failover coordination](http://redis.io/topics/sentinel) and [cluster-membership protocol](http://redis.io/topics/cluster-spec), Solr opted to use ZooKeeper as an external coordinator.

We see that Elasticsearch’s core advantage is its distributed nature. Following that notion, it makes _sense_ for it to own that coordination, which is why its designers chose to implement their own internal cluster membership, ZenDisco. But it turns out writing cluster-membership protocols is _[really fucking hard](http://aphyr.com/posts/317-call-me-maybe-elasticsearch)_, and unless you’ve written proofs for it, you probably shouldn’t do it at all. The analogy here would be writing your own encryption algorithm—there’s tons of institutional knowledge which has laid the groundwork for solutions which are well-researched and well-understood. That knowledge should be embraced in situations like this.

I don’t mean to pick on Redis and Elasticsearch. They’re both excellent systems, but they serve as good examples for this discussion. The problem is that users of these systems tend to overlook the issues exposed by this mentality. Frankly, few people would know problems _exist_ unless they are clearly documented by vendors (and not sales people) and even then, how many people actually read the docs cover-to-cover? It’s essential we know a system’s shortcomings and edge cases so we can recognize which situations to apply it and, more important, which we _should not_.

You don’t have to rely on an existing third-party library or service. Believe it or not, this isn’t a sales pitch for ZooKeeper. If it’s a core business function, it probably makes sense to build it yourself as Joel describes. What _doesn’t_ make sense, however, is to build out whatever that is without being cognizant of conventional wisdom. I’m amazed at how often people are willing to throw away institutional knowledge, either because they don’t seek it out or they think they can do better (without formal verification). If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.
