---
title: "Service-Disoriented Architecture"
date: 2015-06-07T16:03:22-05:00
lastmod: 2015-06-07T21:54:56-05:00
slug: "service-disoriented-architecture"
categories: ["Distributed Systems", "Software Architecture", "Software Engineering"]
tags: ["architecture", "cap theorem", "distributed systems", "eventual consistency", "microservices", "soa", "software engineering"]
---

_“You can have a second computer once you’ve shown you know how to use the first one.” -Paul Barham_

The first rule of distributed systems is don’t distribute your system until you have an observable reason to. Teams break this rule on the regular. People have been talking about service-oriented architecture for a long time, but only recently have microservices been receiving the hype.

The problem, as [Martin Fowler observes](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/MicroservicePremium.html), is that teams are becoming too eager to adopt a microservice architecture without first understanding the [inherent overheads](http://highscalability.com/blog/2014/4/8/microservices-not-a-free-lunch.html). A contributing factor, I think, is you only hear the success stories from companies who did it right, like Netflix. However, what folks often fail to realize is that these companies—in almost all cases—didn’t start out that way. There was a long and winding path which led them to where they are today. The inverse of this, which some refer to as [microservice envy](http://www.thoughtworks.com/radar/techniques/microservice-envy), is causing teams to rush into microservice hell. I call this service-_disoriented_ architecture (or sometimes disservice-oriented architecture when the architecture is DOA).

The term “monolith” has a very negative connotation—unscalable, unmaintainable, unresilient. These things are not intrinsically tied to each other, however, and there’s no reason a single system can’t be modular, maintainable, and fault tolerant at reasonable scale. It’s just less sexy. Refactoring modular code is much easier than refactoring architecture, and refactoring across service boundaries is equally difficult. Fowler describes this as [monolith-first](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/MonolithFirst.html), and I think it’s the right approach (with some exceptions, of course).

> Don’t even consider microservices unless you have a system that’s too complex to manage as a monolith. The majority of software systems should be built as a single monolithic application. Do pay attention to good modularity within that monolith, but don’t try to separate it into separate services.

Service-oriented architecture is about organizational complexity and system complexity. If you have both, you have a case to distribute. If you have one of the two, you _might_ have a case (although if you have organizational complexity without system complexity, you’ve probably scaled your organization improperly). If you have neither, you _do not_ have a case to distribute. State, specifically _distributed_ state, is hell, and [some pundits argue SOA is satan](https://bravenewgeek.com/if-state-is-hell-soa-is-satan/)—perhaps a necessary evil.

There are a lot of motivations for microservices: anti-fragility, fault tolerance, independent deployment and scaling, architectural abstraction, and technology isolation. When services are loosely coupled, the system as a whole tends to be less fragile. When instances are disposable and stateless, services tend to be more fault tolerant because we can spin them up and down, balance traffic, and failover. When responsibility is divided across domain boundaries, services can be independently developed, deployed, and scaled while allowing the right tools to be used for each.

We also need to acknowledge the disadvantages. Adopting a microservice architecture does not automatically buy you anti-fragility. Distributed systems are incredibly precarious. We have to be aware of things like asynchrony, network partitions, node failures, and the [trade-off between availability and data consistency](https://bravenewgeek.com/cap-and-the-illusion-of-choice/). We have to think about resiliency but also the [business and UX implications](https://bravenewgeek.com/distributed-systems-are-a-ux-problem/). We have to consider the boundaries of distributed systems like CAP and [exactly-once delivery](https://bravenewgeek.com/you-cannot-have-exactly-once-delivery/).

When distributing, the emphasis should be on resilience engineering and adopting loosely coupled, stateless components—not microservices for microservices’ sake. We need to view eventual consistency as a tool, not a side effect. The problem I see is that teams often end up with what is essentially a complex, distributed monolith. Now you have two problems. If you’re building a microservice which doesn’t make sense outside the context of another system or isn’t useful on its own, stop and re-evaluate. If you’re designing something to be fast and correct, realize that distributing it will frequently take away both.

Like anti-fragility, microservices do not automatically buy you better maintainability or even scalability. Adopting them requires the proper infrastructure and organization to be in place. Without these, you are bound to fail. In theory, they are intended to increase development velocity, but in many cases the microservice premium ends up slowing it down while creating organizational dependencies and bottlenecks.

There are some key things which must be in place in order for a microservice architecture to be successful: a proper continuous-delivery pipeline, competent DevOps and Ops teams, and prudent service boundaries, to name a few. Good monitoring is essential. It’s also important we have a thorough testing and integration story. This isn’t even considering the fundamental development complexities associated with SOA mentioned earlier.

The better strategy is a bottom-up approach. Start with a monolith or small set of coarse-grained services and work your way up. Make sure you have the data model right. Break out new, finer-grained services as you need to and as you become more confident in your ability to maintain and deploy discrete services. It’s largely about organizational momentum. A young company jumping straight to a microservice architecture is like a golf cart getting on the freeway.

Microservices offer a number of advantages, but for many companies they are a bit of a Holy Grail. Developers are always looking for a silver bullet, but there is always a cost. What we need to do is minimize this cost, and with microservices, this typically means easing our way into it rather than diving into the deep end. Team autonomy and rapid iteration are noble goals, but if we’re not careful, we can end up creating an impedance. Microservices require organization and system maturity. Otherwise, they end up being a premature architectural optimization with a lot of baggage. They end up creating a service-disoriented architecture.
